.\" procscope(1) - Process-scoped runtime investigator for Linux
.\"
.TH PROCSCOPE 1 "April 2026" "procscope 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
procscope \- process-scoped runtime investigation tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B procscope
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-\-\fR \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]]
.br
.B procscope
\fB\-p\fR \fIPID\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B procscope
\fB\-n\fR \fINAME\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B procscope
launches a command under observation, or attaches to an existing process,
and observes its runtime behavior at the kernel level using eBPF.
.PP
It captures process lifecycle events (exec, fork, exit), file activity,
network connections, privilege transitions, namespace changes, and mount
operations. Output is provided as a live terminal timeline, JSONL event
stream, evidence bundle, and/or Markdown summary report.
.PP
Designed for authorized security research, malware triage, reverse
engineering support, incident response, and deep debugging.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-pid\fR \fIPID\fR
Attach to an existing process by PID.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-name\fR \fINAME\fR
Attach to a process by name (first match).
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-out\fR \fIDIR\fR
Write evidence bundle to directory DIR.
.TP
\fB\-\-jsonl\fR \fIFILE\fR
Write events as JSONL to FILE. Use \fB\-\fR for stdout.
.TP
\fB\-\-summary\fR \fIFILE\fR
Write Markdown summary report to FILE.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-color\fR
Disable ANSI color output.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Suppress live terminal timeline output.
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-args\fR \fIN\fR
Maximum number of argv elements to capture (default: 64).
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-path\fR \fIN\fR
Maximum path string length (default: 4096).
.TP
\fB\-\-skip\-checks\fR
Skip privilege and kernel compatibility checks.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Print version information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Trace a suspicious binary:
.B sudo procscope \-\- ./suspicious\-binary
.TP
Attach to a running process:
.B sudo procscope \-p 1234
.TP
Generate evidence bundle and report:
.B sudo procscope \-\-out case\-001 \-\-summary report.md \-\- ./installer.sh
.TP
Stream events as JSONL:
.B sudo procscope \-\-jsonl events.jsonl \-\- ./tool
.SH REQUIREMENTS
Linux kernel 5.8+ with BTF support (CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO_BTF=y).
.PP
Root privileges or CAP_BPF + CAP_PERFMON + CAP_SYS_RESOURCE capabilities.
.SH EVIDENCE BUNDLE
When invoked with \fB\-\-out\fR, procscope creates a directory containing:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
metadata.json \- investigation metadata
.IP \(bu 2
events.jsonl \- complete event stream
.IP \(bu 2
process\-tree.txt \- human\-readable process tree
.IP \(bu 2
files.json \- file activity summary
.IP \(bu 2
network.json \- network activity summary
.IP \(bu 2
notable.json \- security\-relevant events
.IP \(bu 2
summary.md \- Markdown executive summary
.RE
.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
File activity is best\-effort; not all I/O paths are traced.
.IP \(bu 2
DNS visibility is limited to userspace UDP queries to port 53.
.IP \(bu 2
io_uring and sendfile operations are not captured.
.IP \(bu 2
Container metadata is best\-effort from cgroup path parsing.
.IP \(bu 2
Event drops may occur under extreme event rates.
.SH EXIT STATUS
When tracing a launched command,
.B procscope
exits with the same exit code as the traced command.
When using \fB\-p\fR or \fB\-n\fR, exits 0 on normal Ctrl\-C termination.
.SH FILES
Evidence bundles are written to the directory specified by \fB\-\-out\fR.
No persistent state files are created.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR strace (1),
.BR bpftrace (8),
.BR bpftool (8)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/Mutasem-mk4/procscope/issues
.SH AUTHOR
procscope contributors
.SH LICENSE
MIT License
